[applause]
>> Thank you for coming. It is it's a treat
to be with you and sharing all this
stuff. Um, since we seem to be in a
second Cold War, maybe it's a good time
to revisit the last one to see why it
turned out the way it did and why the
participants in it thought it turned out
the way it did. So, I'm going to pose
the question, why Russia lost the Cold
War, and people have loads of different
answers to that question. So, this is
going to be a tour of the counter
arguments. I'm going to start with an
answer that many Americans have, very
simple one that's like, Ronald Reagan
single-handedly defeated the Soviet
Union. So, that's one possible answer.
But then I'm going to give you all kinds
of counter arguments to that, and some
of them are going to be other external
explanations of what others did to the
Soviet Union. Others are internal ones
of what the Soviet Union, the cards they
didn't play particularly well, and then
I've got some umbrella explanations. So,
that's my plan for this evening.
The story that Ronald Reagan did it,
well, here's a picture at the Reagan
Ranch after the Cold War's over. You see
the Gorbachevs and you see the Reagans
and they seem to be having a grand old
time, which suggests there's something
maybe off with that explanation. But
anyway, the way the Ronald Reagan did it
school is Ronald Reagan did a massive
military build-up, and that's some would
argue it bankrupted the Soviet Union. He
was a man of words and deeds. He made
really good speeches that were
memorable. Here's one before Parliament
where he says, "The regimes planted by
totalitarianism have had more than 30
years to establish their legitimacy, but
none, not one regime has yet been able
to risk free elections. Regimes planted
by bayonets do not take root." And then
here he is before the Brandenburg Gate.
This is in Berlin, long a symbol of
German greatness, but then it was a
locked gate on the Berlin Wall. And
here's Ronald Reagan. "General Secretary
Gorbachev, if you seek peace, if you
seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe, if you seek
liberalization, come to this gate. Mr.
Gorbachev, open this gate. Tear down
this wall." And who can forget the Evil
Empire speech, which he gave to the
National Association of Evangelicals in
Orlando, Florida, and they skipped
Disneyland to hear it.
All right. Reagan did a very significant
military build-up that actually had
started under Carter when the Soviets
invaded Afghanistan. Big mistake, as we
discovered. And um
he also
uh invested, deployed uh missiles in
Europe. He was busy funding
anti-communist insurgencies and also
others who didn't like the Soviet Union
all over the world. Starts doing more
aggressive military patrolling
patrolling and by the time he's out of
office, he's like half a dozen ships
short of this 600-ship navy or whatever
it is he was planning to make. And uh he
also was trying to build a missile
shield, his Strategic Defense
Initiative. And the problem is the
Soviets tried to match him on this. And
if you add up the GNPs of the United
States, NATO allies, and Japan, well,
that would be seven times larger than
the Soviet GNP, and you got to be aware
of symmetric strategy. So, the CIA
thought during the Cold War that perhaps
Russia was spending up to a 20% part of
its GNP on defense. After the Cold War
ended, when you're getting getting more
accurate statistics, it turns out it was
at least 40 or 50%, and some people say
it was up to a truly economy-busting 70%
if you take into account all the
infrastructure investments that were
associated with military things. If you
look during the Cold War, the United
States was spending less than 8%,
Germany less than 6%, Japan less than
2%, and Nazi Germany, which is no
55%.
So, uh you look at all this and uh it
was difficult. So, I am going to be
quoting lots of Russians today
because they have thought deeply about
the fate of their country, how life as
they
uh knew it disappeared, the Soviet Union
gone, the empire gone. They thought a
lot about it. And here is a former
ambassador
to West Germany, Valentin Falin. And
here's his take. "Following the American
strategy of our exhaustion in the arms
race, our crisis in public health and
all the things have to do with standard
of living reached a new uh dimension of
crisis. And then if you add to the arms
race with the United States, the arms
race that was going on with China on
that border, the uh the arms race
plunged the Soviet economy into a
permanent crisis." And here you have
Georgy Arbatov, who is the Soviet
Union's late Soviet Union's uh finest
expert on the United States, at least
the most famous one. He's looking at
uh the Soviet war in Afghanistan. He
said, "It is quite clear that the Afghan
War was most advantageous for the United
States, and we got our Vietnam because
the United States is busy funding the
other side, and it's costly." And uh
Gorbachev is looking at this as he's
telling the Politburo a year after he
came into power. He said, "Look, the
Americans are bet
uh betting precisely on the fact that
the Soviet Union is scared about of this
SDI missile, the Strategic Defense
Initiative's a missile defense. That's
why they're putting pressure on us to
exhaust us." Correct.
So, some would argue
that the US victory in the arms race
guaranteed victory in the Cold War. We
go, Ronnie. That's one explanation. But
I'm going to give you a tour of the
counter arguments and some other
explanations, starting with Presidents
Ford, Carter, and the Helsinki
Declaration. So, after World War II, the
Soviets had wanted to convene a
conference of European states to confirm
its expanded World War II borders. And
for a long time nobody was interested.
And then the Western Europeans are sick
of all the drama. The United States
still doesn't want to show, but we go
along with our allies. And our allies
insist on including human rights
provisions, and we think this is crazy
land because we know the Soviets are
never going to
um enforce those things, but you got the
uh
the Helsinki uh agreements, accords that
have all sorts of human rights
provisions. Well, lo and behold,
unbeknownst to anybody, dissidents
across the Eastern Bloc and human rights
activists across the West start holding
the communist to account for the
agreements that they have signed, and
start contrasting the liberation that
communism promises versus the
dictatorship actually delivered. And
this human rights uh movement took on
within the Soviet Bloc and abroad, it
took on a life of its own. So, here you
have the former director of the CIA and
former head of the Department of
Defense, Robert Gates, saying, "The
Soviets desperately wanted this big
conference,
and it laid the foundations for the end
of their empire. We resisted it for
years, only to discover years later that
this conference had yielded benefits
beyond our wildest imagination. Go
figure."
Uh and here
uh is Jimmy Carter with his human rights
uh initiative, and it was Gorbachev's
English-language translator who said
that actually Carter's uh emphasis on
precisely the human rights that were
denied to Soviets uh really resonated,
and it made people think that they
wanted a more democratic, open, liberal
society. So, here's
uh Carter giving an address graduation
address at Notre Dame. He said, "We have
reaffirmed reaffirmed America's
commitment to human rights as a
fundamental tenant of our foreign
policy. What draws us Americans together
is a belief in human freedom. We want
the world to know that our nation stands
for more than just financial prosperity.
We're bigger than that."
Uh and here is Eduard Shevardnadze,
um
Gorbachev's foreign minister, echoing
some of these sentiments. He said,
"Look, the belief that we are a great
country is deeply ingrained in me. But
great in what?
Uh territory?
Uh population? Quantity of arms?
People's troubles? Uh the individual's
lack of rights?
Uh in what do we, who have virtually the
highest infant mortality uh rate in the
world, take pride? It's not easy
answering the question, who are you? Who
do you wish to be? A country which is
feared or a country which is respected?
A country of power or a country of
kindness?"
And others uh agreed that
communism was essential to the survival
of the Soviet Union, and but it's an
undemocratic
ideology that fundamentally it's a it's
a foundation that can't can't endure
forever, and that's the take of Vitaly
Ignatenko, a Russian journalist. And
Oleg Genievsky, a Soviet career
diplomat, is saying, "Look, communist
ideol-
ideology is associated above all with
the Soviet Union. Its rejection created
a vacuum, and it determined its ultimate
fate." And then Boris Yeltsin, who is
Gorbachev's successor, said, "Look, no
one wants a new Soviet Union."
So, some would argue, this counter
argument, that human rights clauses of
the Helsinki Accords and Carter's
subsequent human rights campaign
destroyed communist belief in communism.
Okay, another president, another counter
argument.
Uh those who are uh fans of Richard
Nixon would say, "No, no, no, no, no,
no. It was Richard Nixon who played the
China card so the United States and
China could gang up on the Soviet Union
and overextend it financially to wreck
it militarily. I think the Chinese would
beg to differ and say, "No, no, no, no.
It was Mao who played the America card."
Because what's going on in 1969? There's
a border war between China and the
Soviet Union. China's gotten its nuclear
bomb in '64 and no longer has to defer
to the Soviet Union and start playing
more tough on their border
disagreements. And so, the Soviets are
really upset.
And they come to the United States and
ask us whether it would be okay to nuke
these people
because they think Americans don't like
the Chinese. Well, we didn't, but we
said, "No, it's not okay to nuke those
people."
And so, the Chinese figure it out. The
one that wants to nuke you is your
primary adversary, right? Up until then,
think about it, China and Russia, for
them, the United States was the primary
adversary. Now, their primary adversary
is with each other, freeing up the
United States to decide which one it's
going to cozy up to. And the United
States decides it's going to cozy up to
China. Why? Well, Chinese belligerency
forces the Soviets not only they've
already got a big militarized border
with Europe. Now, they're going to do
the same thing on a very long border
with China. And this is nuclear-armed
mechanized forces, very expensive.
Imagine if this country had to have such
borders with Canada and Mexico. It would
be It would be bankrupting. And we are
far richer than the Soviet
Union was then, whenever.
It was bankrupting. So, some would argue
that US cooperation with China fatally
overextended the Soviet Union.
One could take all of these arguments,
starting with President Nixon all the
way through Reagan, to say make an
overarching argument that says, "Look,
each president opened up opportunities
for the others who then leveraged them."
So, Nixon plays the China card which
others play with increasing dexterity.
Ford comes in and begins dabbling in
human rights. Carter then comes in and
really goes for human rights and starts
doing a military buildup which then
Ronald Reagan really does. So, that by
the time you get to Reagan, he is
dealing in a position of both
ideological and military strength
vis-à-vis the Soviet Union. And for
those who think that US foreign policy
was not consistent during the Cold War,
you're not looking at it at the
strategic level.
There were certain different strategies
going on and how best to achieve it, but
both parties agreed the the goals were
free trade, democracy, containment of
communism. Those were staples of US
foreign policy both parties for its
duration. So, some would argue that
Presidents Nixon through Reagan produced
the cumulative presidential effects to
defeat the Soviet Union.
Okay. Others would say, "Forget this
great man theory of history business.
That's really passé. What really
accounted for the outcome of the Cold
War was this military platform." That's
Pentagon-ese for large military systems.
But anyway, it's a nuclear-powered
nuclear-armed submarine. They say that
this is the the item. The way deterrence
a theory worked during the Cold War and
I believe now as well is you In order to
deter the other side, you have to have a
reliable second strike capability. So,
if they thought of lobbing a nuke at
you, they would be guaranteed that you
would have the second strike to lob a
nuke back. Therefore, they're never
going to lob the first nuke. When Jimmy
Carter became president, he was a
graduate of Annapolis and also a
submariner, the United States began a
much more aggressive deployment of its
fleet and that's continued even more so
under Reagan, where we're taking our
submarines and we're targeting Soviet
submarines in their home water bastions.
So, the Soviets are thinking that we're
going to be able to destroy their second
strike capability on our first strike
and they're having a heart attack. So,
here you have Valery Boldin, a long-time
aide to Gorbachev, saying, "Look,
the most powerful strength of the United
States is the naval fleet and we aren't
going to get one or our geography
actually isn't set up to use one the way
the United States can." And then you
have Marshall Yazov saying,
"For the Americans, the main means of
So, when you get Marshall Akhromeyev
who's visiting the United States in
1987, at the end of the Cold War, he
will kill himself, but he's still around
in '87. And he's telling his American
hosts, "You know where our submarines
are, but we don't know where yours are.
It's destabilizing you. You, the United
States Navy, are the problem. Go Navy."
And here's his host, Admiral Crowe,
who's going, "Yeah, the inability of the
Soviet Union to maintain a strong
defensive capability
led to the demise of the Soviet Union
and to the removal of the Soviets as a
major threat to us." So,
some you can make a perfectly good
argument to say the Soviet Union could
not counter technologically or
financially the US submarine threat to
its retaliatory nuclear forces, so war
termination was the only thing it could
do.
All right.
So, all of these preceding explanations
are naval explanations, spelled with an
E as in staring at one's own. They're
all about what the United States did or
didn't do. So, let's get beyond the
half-court tennis of Team America and
you need to look at the other side of
the net. And this is where the
Western guru for things military,
Carl von Clausewitz, emphasizes
reciprocity in war and the interaction
of both sides say you're not going to do
well unless you consider what the other
side is doing. So, um I have given you
uh some
external explanations and I'm going to
do the internal ones. And here is Arnold
Toynbee, who is one of the finest
historians of the 20th century. Wrote a
big multi-multi-volume history of the
West
uh and which he said argues that
civilizations die from suicide, not by
murder. So, I discussed the murder, what
the United States tried to do the Soviet
Union. Now, I'm going to talk about the
suicide, what the Soviets did to
themselves.
And here is yeah, counterargument number
one which the argument is the Soviet
Union was an empire and when that
collapsed, that meant they lost the Cold
War. During the Cold War, the Korean War
and the Vietnam War, there was much fear
in the West of the domino theory and the
idea is one country fell to communism
and then the next and next and next and
next would fall to communism. Turns out
the domino theory did not apply to
capitalism. It applied to communism
because once the democratic contagion
hit one Warsaw Bloc country in Eastern
Europe, it spread to the others until it
was a seething mess and they fell like
dominoes.
So, in 1988-89, there were all kinds of
demonstrations in the Eastern Bloc, the
Soviet Union. In the Soviet Union,
they're for political freedoms. In the
Eastern Bloc, they're for freedom from
the Soviet Union. And Gorbachev may have
not gotten that detail. But they're all
about not only wanting political
freedoms, but also they're about
crumbling economies of how to fix their
miserable standards of living. And very
uncharacteristically,
uh the Russians didn't send tanks. In
fact, Gorbachev uh welcomed and
encouraged reforms in the Eastern Bloc
both political and economic just as he
was doing in the Soviet Union. So, his
ideas glasnost, openness, and
perestroika, rebuilding, they resonated
at home and abroad. Uh
And these reforms began in Poland.
Poland had been
um a scene of much worker unrest many
times in 1956, 1970, 1976, and '80 and
'81. In '80 and '81, this is when
Solidarity, the workers movement, gets
going and it gets a national and
international reputation.
The next set of strikes are happening in
because in the preceding several years,
the Polish standard of living had shrunk
by over 3% and the government was out of
cash and wanted to raise basic food
prices and Poles hit the streets. And
the government was in a panic because it
was worried the economy would go into
freefall. So, the government cut a deal
with Solidarity said, "You call off the
strikes and then we'll let you into
political talks." And Solidarity agreed.
And there was a complicating factor on
the all of this. It's called the Roman
Catholic Church, which is an institution
of enormous credibility and legitimacy
in Poland, which had a partiality for
Solidarity and it had a Polish Pope.
Um
and uh so,
the round table discussions, where these
political talks, they occurred a year
later in February 1989. And the Soviets
encouraged them. In fact, here's one
Soviet person there advising the Poles,
"Look, you got to find some quick
solutions out of your economic and
political mess. You're an itty-bitty
country, so when you make mistakes,
they'll be itty-bitty mistakes, but if
we make them,
they'll be big."
They got that one right. The Polish
Communist Party thought they had this
one covered by the way they jiggered the
election rules. Not quite. The day they
held elections is exactly the same day
that
Deng Xiaoping turned the tanks on
demonstrators in Beijing and you have
the Tiananmen Massacre. Two solutions
for the problem. So, the way the
elections worked out in Poland
is Solidarity won every single seat for
which it could compete but one.
And then only three people in the
Communist designated
seats actually won. So, who won all the
rest of them?
The box on the ballot called none of the
above.
Yes, the Roman Catholic Church had
helped instruct people that that's the
box you want.
With that,
the legitimacy of the Communist Party to
rule had just been wrecked and we're on
to democracy in Poland.
And this democratic contagion spread
into East Germany four months later.
This is about the 40th anniversary of
the founding of East Germany and 70,000
people demonstrated Leipzig and within
the week around oh like 1.4 million
Germans are demonstrating over 200
demonstrators. Typically, the East
Germans
would have sent tanks. That was what
they would have done in the past, but
would we tank man Eric Honecker was
already out of a job. His ruinous
policies of living off debt since he
came to power in 1971 had just about
wrecked
East Germany. So, he was out and then
less than two weeks later the Council of
Ministers resigns and then in November
8th the Politburo resigns and then on
the 9th whatever is left of that
government is issuing new travel
regulations and you might wonder what's
travel got to do with it. I'll get
there.
So,
in response to a question at a news
conference this guy Gunter Schabowski
who was one of the remaining Communist
helping run the show,
he gets asked a question, doesn't know
the answer, and so he wings it. And the
question is when do these travel
regulations go into effect? And he goes,
"Immediately."
Well, crowds immediately started
gathering at the six gates
to the Berlin Wall. And at one of them
the border guards decided that
discretion was the better part of valor
and they opened the gate.
And East Germans poured into West
Berlin. And within the first week alone
over half of East Germans Germany's
population visited the West. And within
the month 1% of the population emigrated
to the West. And
like the Polish elections, this opening
the gate was a pivotal decision. A
pivotal decision, whatever it is,
there's no going back to the way it was.
And here's good old Gunter going, "Gosh,
we hadn't a clue that opening the wall
was the beginning of the end of East
Germany." Okay.
Better luck next time.
And the Russians
were shocked
by
how unpopular they were. They were
thinking they were going to get credit
Gorbachev for East German East Europe's
liberation rather than blame for Eastern
Europe's enserfment. And here you have
Yuri Ryzhov, a scientist and
parliamentarian going, "All of our
former satellites by compulsion cast off
from us as fast and as far as possible."
Anatoly Kovalyov who is a deputy foreign
minister
said, "Look, and we had no confidence
whatsoever concerning whom the East Army
East German Army's going to shoot, the
demonstrators or us." And the same thing
for the Polish and Hungarian armies.
Great. With allies like this, who needs
enemies? The allies got to cover it. So,
this argument under this argument unrest
in the empire forced the Soviet Union to
forfeit the Cold War.
Okay, I got another counterargument.
Says nonsense. The real problem was the
satellites were unhealthy. That's why
the whole thing fell apart. So, this map
is 1960
and you see all those tempting green
places? They're about to become
independent and they are really sick of
their Western European colonizers. Enter
the Soviet Union with a program to put
the West out of business. There were
many takers.
Okay, fast forward to late 1980s. Soviet
Union is on a roll. Small hitch. In the
late 1970s there was a big recession and
it continued into the 80s and it tanked
commodity prices. So, for some of the
new found
new found pals like Angola, South Yemen,
Ethiopia, Nicaragua,
it wrecked their export earnings cuz
they're exporting commodities and these
commodity prices are down. It in many
cases it it halved them. The Soviet
Union was really dependent on oil
exports, still is. Well,
oil prices tanked and oil accounted for
up to 55% of the Soviet budget. So, here
Brezhnev has got a a deep bench of
non-performing pals at a time when he
doesn't have the money to support all of
them.
And worse yet from the Soviet point of
view, so it's dumped all this money in
these third world friends. Meanwhile,
it's got its own nationalities
who are deeply unhappy and they want out
of the empire. And most problematically,
they all revolt at exactly the same
time. And one of the rules for
continental empire is no two-front wars.
Well, Russia has so many fronts at this
point it can't even keep keep count. And
the unrest in the internal empire of
nationalities started as soon as
Gorbachev got in. There were student
movements in Kazakhstan and Yakutia,
opposite ends of things. By the time you
get to 1990, I don't know there there
like 60 76 seething ethnic rebellions in
different parts of this. There was too
much to go on for for the Soviet
government to handle. So,
you could argue that the Soviet Union
bankrupted itself on the third on the
third world while ignoring ignoring its
own internal third world of
nationalities whose simultaneous revolts
brought down the Soviet Union.
I experimented with different video
models to help me animate some of my
essays. But the thing is my team and I
are very opinionated about what we want
the end product to look like. And so for
a video model to be useful to us, it
needs to be able to follow our
instructions for exactly what kind of
shot and framing and lighting we want.
But all these labels which would make it
clear how to map from a specific style
to a generative video don't exist by
default in the pre-training
distribution. So, when one of Labelbox's
customers wanted to improve their video
generation model, Labelbox pulled
together a team of expert
cinematographers and editors and
directors and had them annotate clips
with concise technical descriptions so
that the model would have context on
things like dolly shots and Rembrandt
lighting. As you can see, unlocking
broad economic value from these models
requires not just coders and STEM PhDs,
but people with taste and context in all
kinds of different domains. Labelbox can
get you experts in all of the above and
more. So, whatever skill you're looking
to give your models, there's a good
chance that Labelbox can help you.
Reach out at labelbox.com/theworkcase.
I got a completely different argument
for you. If you don't like all of those,
I got another one for you. It's the
economy, stupid, right? That that line.
Um
One could argue that communism failed as
an economic system. If you look at
growth statistics for the Soviet Union,
they're pretty good post-World War II
when they're rebuilding, but they go
they really stagnate from the mid-70s
onward. So, for the decade preceding
Gorbachev's coming to power, Soviet
growth
stats were 1 to 2% lower than those of
the of the
the United States and the compounding
effects of that were enormous. What's
going on?
Everyone's lying to each other. So,
that's the the data that Soviets are
using is garbage. What's So, if you're
working for a like a subunit of of an
enterprise, you have to lie about the
And then you have to lie about what you
need saying you need more than you do
because you're worried about getting
enough things. It's not a market system
where you just the price dictates it.
This is all about the plan. You got to
enter the right numbers and then you get
whatever inputs you get from the
centralized plan. So, everyone's lying.
They're aggregating all the lies. The
higher up the food chain you aggregate
these things, the worse the data is. So,
that the Soviet government has no idea
what the actual value of capital or
labor are, no idea what actual
productivity is, and no one has any idea
what consumer preferences are. You're
not using markets and prices. So, that
the misallocation
of capital and labor goes unnoticed
until it metastasizes. It's already
metastasized into a catastrophe. And to
give you a sense of these
misallocations,
the Soviet Union was rotting from 20 to
40% of its crops.
Well, it's using scarce hard currency
for agricultural imports to make up for
those crops. Total mess.
And so you can look at what happens to
the economy with oil prices down and
we're into a spiraling mess. So, that
from when Gorbachev comes in
[clears throat] in '85 to when it hits a
trough in Russia in 1998,
you see this crashing share of world GDP
of the Eastern Bloc. As a result of all
this even if you look at Soviet
statistics on deficits, trade balances,
debt, they're just soaring and then GDNP
growth goes double digit negative.
That's called shrinkage. It's not the
normal thing. So, Marshall Yazov, here's
his take. "We simply lack the power of
all these well wealthy NATO nations. We
had to find an alternative to the arms
race. So,
and here's a foreign service officer,
Anatoly Adamishin. He said, "Look,
our problems began with the departure
from isolation. The our main reasons for
a collapse were internal, not external
reasons. The Soviet economy was
literally exhausted from this monstrous
arms race, militarism, enemies with half
the world." That's his take. And
Gorbachev told the
Central Committee. He said, "Look, we're
encircled not by invincible armies, but
by superior economies." And he often
told people, "Living this way any longer
is impossible."
So, you can make a powerful argument.
It's the Soviet economy that lost the
Cold War.
Uh this gentleman, Alexis de
Tocqueville, is very famous for writing
a a book about the last days of the
French monarchy before the French
Revolution
overturned it. He also wrote something
about democracy in America, both
excellent books. But this one has come
from the one about France. And which
Tocqueville observes, "The most
dangerous moment for a bad government is
when it begins to reform." Russians of
all political persuasions, they agree on
at least one thing. Uh it and that is
that Gorbachev's role and how the Cold
War turned out was pivotal. That he
played in a very essential part. And
Gorbachev made his decisions based on
certain false assumptions. One of them
was the irreversible direction of
history. Gorbachev thought of history
going always forward towards communism,
never backwards to capitalism. Of
course, Eastern Europe took a U-turn.
Went straight back to capitalism. And
here is Leonid Shebarshin, who is
uh
a
a senior person in the KGB, their
intelligence office. He said, "The
thought never occurred to the government
that it's possible to withdraw from
socialism." And if you think about
both communist theory and how
imperialism works in practice, usually
the mother country is more developed
than whatever all the colonies are,
right? Well, the Soviet Union was an
inverted empire. People in Eastern
Europe as a group were more
well-educated and they were richer than
Russians. It was like a donut empire. So
that when uh the empire went Eastern
Europe,
uh Russians could no longer siphon off
the wealth of these enserfed populations
in Eastern Europe, which explains why
they leave wanted to leave. It also
suggests why Putin wants them back.
All right, another false assumption has
to do with the sentiments of the
neighbors. Gorbachev was convinced he
was going to get credit for liberating
Eastern Europe, rather than blame as a
Russian for having enserfed them in
in the first place. For Gorbachev, the
the clock be- began on his watch. For
other people, no, no, Stalin's when it
began when he started shooting a lot of
people.
Uh so here you have Anatoly Chernyaev,
foreign policy advisor to Gorbachev,
saying
um
that Gorbachev thought that bringing
freedom to our Eastern European
satellites would have [clears throat]
them adopt socialism with a human face.
He made an enormous mistake. Because
these countries brutally turned their
back on us. Really? If that's brutal,
then what pray tell was Stalin?
And then it gets better. The politics in
connection with our former friends were
totally unexpected to us. Really?
Uh you occupy people, you never leave,
you shoot a lot of people in their
government, you put in a new government,
you siphon off a lot of their wealth,
and you impose a non-performing economic
system, and you wonder why they don't
like you.
Think about the United States. Interview
intervenes all around the world in other
people's troubles, dumps billions in
economic aid, and even leaves, and
people don't like us. I don't know why
the Russians think they're so special.
Another false assumption.
Gorbachev believed that if the Warsaw
Pact disappeared, the military alliance
of the Eastern Bloc, if that
disappeared, then NATO would disappear.
And that if
the Comecon, which is their trading
organization, if that goes away, then
it's a European Community in those days.
It becomes the European Union later.
Anyway, that would disappear. Not quite,
because it turns out that organizations
that are
uh coercive versus those that are
voluntary, they uh
dissolve for different reasons. And then
Gorbachev also assumed that the United
States would share a continental outlook
of not wanting strong powers. And that
the United States therefore would not
want a unified Germany, let alone a
strong unified Germany. So when all the
unrest is happening in Germany,
Gorbachev is off taking a vacation. Poor
life choice, because at that moment,
President George Bush Sr. and Chancellor
Kohl of Germany are working on
fast-tracking German unification of a
fully sovereign unified Germany, both
halves in NATO.
All right. So,
many of Gorbachev's closest supporters
at the end of it all, uh blamed him.
They said, "Look, his foreign policy
mistakes were a function of his domestic
policy mistakes, and it uh destroyed the
Soviet Union." And back to this America
expert, Vladimir Lukin, Gorbachev was no
Deng Xiaoping. Okay. And Arbatov, who's
their premier America expert, "The
stupidity of lea- of our leaders caused
the disintegration of the Soviet Union."
So,
the big bozo was playing with plastic
bags, stuck one on his head,
committed suicide. It was by mistake.
All right, Lukin continued, "In the
West, they love Gorbachev, because
everything took place so easily and
cheaply. Basically like that, but only
for you.
For us, it was expensive."
Uh but you could argue the time to
reassess all the Stalinist stuff
uh was long overdue.
All right.
Here's a completely different way of
looking at it. I've been giving you sins
of commission.
And now I'm going to do sins of
omission. It's a good framework. It's
useful for other things. So, the sins of
commission are all the things Gorbachev
did. Now, what I'm going to do is what
the army didn't do. Uh some would argue
that the Red Army should have done
exactly what Deng Xiaoping ordered his
army to do. You just send the send tanks
against civilian demonstrators, and they
will truly crush them.
And it'll be over. Communist Party is
still in power in China 30 years later.
So, there are some people who believe
that this was a terrible mistake. So,
this argument would be that timely tank
deployments, TTD, my contribution to
military acronyms, would have changed
the outcome of the Cold War.
All right. Others would be back to the
great man of history and sins of
commission, and they wouldn't be picking
on Gorbachev, but his successor, Boris
Yeltsin, who and their two big pieces of
evidence would be, "Look, he
removed Article 6 from the Soviet
Constitution, which basically guaranteed
that the Communist Party would always be
the it would monopolize power." And then
in addition, the following years, so
Yeltsin's the head of Russia, he gets
together with the heads of Ukraine and
Bella-
Belarus, and they sign the Belovezha
Accords, which then formally dissolved
the Soviet Union. So, um according to
this way of thinking, um
it's his fault.
It's suicide on purpose. And what it
does is it opens the door for multiple
parties and for the nationalities within
the Soviet Empire to become independent.
All right. So, I've given you internal
explanations. I've given you external
ex- explanations. Now, I'm going to give
you some umbrella expe-
explanations. And it's all and they're
based on all the preceding evidence, and
they come to opposite conclusions. The
first one was, "Well, any of the above.
Uh it's inevitable." And the opposite
conclusion from the same evidence is,
"No, no, no, it took all of the all of
the above. The West barely won." So, I'm
going to start with
any of the above. You could argue with
this many serious problems, it was a
matter of time before the Soviet Union
collapsed. And um it was an
objectionable system for precisely the
reasons the West didn't like it. It had
a brutally inefficient economic system.
And Russians, who invented the thing, at
the end of the day didn't want it
either.
So, by this way of looking at it, you
have people like
Yuri Ryzhkov, a a genuine rocket
scientist, who says, "Look, the main
reason for the collapse
of the Soviet Union is the rottenness of
its system." And then here's a
journalist, Timur Shapanov, who said,
"Look, I think from the beginning, the
genes of disintegration were contained
in the genetics of this governmental
political formation." Don't you love the
products of the Soviet educational
system?
Uh don't ever use wording like that. All
right. So, you could argue that the
Soviet Union was destined to to fail
with this many problems. Others would
come to the opposite conclusion. They
would say, "No, it took every single one
of them for the Cold War to end on
Western terms." And here's back to
Anatoly
Kovalyov, the Deputy Foreign Minister.
He said, "Look,
all these factors merged, internal,
ideological, economic, military. It's
all of them. You remove any one of them,
and you get a different outcome. Maybe
the Cold War ends, but it might end
completely differently. So, by this line
of reason, the best way barely won.
Should feel very fortunate that it did."
One can take this last argument and say,
"It was more than that. It also took the
confluence and office of two very
talented leaders, Helmut Kohl of Germany
and George Bush Sr. of the United
States. Not not the son who got in got
into those forever wars, but the dad who
didn't.
Uh George Bush Sr. had one of the most
amazing resumes of any president ever to
any any person become president of the
United States. Just look at him. When
he's really young, he's a war hero in
World War II. He's a Navy pilot,
dangerous thing to do. He did it. And
then he comes back and he gets his BA at
Yale and graduates with honors. And then
he becomes a representative for this
a district in in Texas after he's
already made himself a millionaire by
the oil business that he started. And
then he come becomes ambassador to the
UN followed by US representative to the
PRC. It's before we had formal
diplomatic relations, so he's the guy
who's setting that off, becomes director
of the CIA, and then he is Ronald
Reagan's understudy for 8 years as vice
president. He is incredibly fit for the
job. And Helmut Kohl is equally fit for
the job. He is the longest-serving
chancellor in German history since his
illustrious predecessor, Sir Otto von
Bismarck. He starts out getting a PhD in
history and political science. He also
starts out in business, but then he
works for state government initially as
a representative, then as a governor.
And um
he becomes chairman of his political
party, the Christian Democratic Union,
for a quarter of a century. Once he gets
in, he decides he's going to buy up East
Germany one tourist at a time. How does
that work?
East Germans turned out really like to
travel. West Germans had always been
able to travel to East Germany or they
long have been able to travel to East
Germany, but East Germans definitely
could not easily travel to West Germany.
Why? Cuz they have a habit of staying.
But all of a sudden, East Germany eases
up on the travel regulations. And you
might ask why? And the answer would be
money.
Just like the Poles, the East Germans
were deep in an economic mess of their
own making. Would be tank man Erich
Honecker who got the boot at the very
end. Well, his
uh
uh staying in power paradigm that he
implements in 1971
is going to be easily going to live off
debt. He needs to make certain
uh
social benefits available and consumer
benefits available for labor uh
stability, not having labor unrest. And
the way he's going to do that is he's
not going to do many in domestic
investments and he's going to do a lot
of borrowing particularly from
West Germany. Well, that's unsustainable
long term. So, by the time you get to
the end of the Cold War, if he's going
to fix that and even out the accounts,
it would be a 30% decline in East German
standard of living. So, he really needs
the pocket change from the tourists. So,
what
Kohl does is a brisk
brisk business of tourists and things.
What he does in return for the easing of
travel restrictions,
he pays East Germany several hundred
million
Deutschmarks extra to allow that to
happen. And then he gets the Hungarians
to go along. He gets the Hungarians to
open up their Austrian border to let
East Germans out that way and he gives
them a half a billion Deutschmarks for
that little favor. And then
when Kohl introduces his 10-point
unification program, cuz now he's
thinking he's going to get both Germanys
together,
um this is when he starts doling out big
bucks to the Soviet Union whose economy
is unraveling. And Gorbachev is going to
be desperate for this cash as that's
happening. So,
West Germany provides 100 million in
food especially in meat for the Soviet
Union that doesn't have these things.
Nevertheless,
these the unrest just keeps on going.
The Berlin Wall, as I've told you, is
breached and then you wind up with a
West German caretaker government and the
financial situation in Russia itself is
unraveling. And by the time you get to
January 1990, Bush and Kohl got together
and they decided they want a really fast
track German reunification. Why? Cuz
they got to get it done before this
unraveling crisis that Gorbachev falls
from power as a result of it. So, they
are have got a a game going, the two of
them.
And it's complicated. And here's why.
Uh Gorbachev was dead against
Germany a united Germany in NATO. He's
not keen about really a united Germany,
let alone one in NATO. The US State
Department experts, the guys who know
everything, are saying, "No, no, no, you
want to go slow on this unification
business."
Uh and then
uh Kohl is running a coalition
government. There are people in that
government he cannot fire or cuz they're
from different political parties. One of
them is his foreigns minister, this guy
Genscher, who is very skeptical about
Germany being part of NATO. And then it
turns out although Britain had talked a
good peace during the Cold War, it
didn't actually want a unified Germany,
nor did France. Why? Because that
unified Germany would eclipse theirs
economically. They didn't want that to
happen. So, Kohl and Bush divide up the
tasks.
Kohl is going to reassure the Soviet
Union that Germany's not going to be
belligerent or do horrible things. And
Kohl's going to work on the financial
unification cuz the Soviets are thinking
in terms of military unification. You
know, where you deploy your troops, that
determines things. Uh-uh, wrong
instrument of national power.
Precisely cuz the Soviets didn't
understand finance, that's why they're
in such a mess. Whereas the Germans do,
what they're going to do is get East
Germany on the West German Deutschmark.
And at that point, they will control all
the money and they will control
decisions, but the Russians aren't going
to see that coming. Meanwhile, Bush is
supposed to work the alliances with
particularly Britain and France in the
West. There are all sorts of meetings
that were coming up. And Bush's job is
to delay those meetings for as long as
possible so German unification can
proceed as far as possible. And the two
of them
are doing a tag team diplomacy with
Gorbachev that he just can't keep up
with with given that his own home
economy is got this double-digit
shrinkage rate. So, here's how they go.
As the trades get bigger, the amount of
money you pay Gorbachev gets bigger. So,
first of all, it's just to get
a unified Germany. Then it's to get a
unified Germany with West Germany still
in NATO. Then it's to get unified
Germany with all of Germany in NATO. So,
here's how the money goes.
Gorbachev agrees to German unification.
We are no longer paying hundreds of
millions of Deutschmark. We're paying
billions of Deutschmark, 5 billion
Deutschmark for that one. Then Gorbachev
agrees that states can choose their own
alliances, i.e. whether or not to join
NATO. And then he gets the US offers
nine assurances, but he it's also a
trade agreement that Gorbachev really
wants. And then the economic union goes
into effect. So, we've now done the
financial reunification of Germany. And
this is when London there's a London
declaration that's inviting Eastern
European countries to coordinate more
closely with NATO. And then in return,
Gorbachev has got a promise of a G7
summit meeting that's going to fast
track aid to him, which it will do.
And then Gorbachev agrees to German NATO
membership. And at this point, big even
bigger things are happening. Germany's
going to agree to its border with
Poland. I'll get there and explain. And
Germany provides 15 billion in
Deutschmark including building all kinds
of new apartment buildings for
repatriated Soviet soldiers who are
going home. Why are you doing that? Cuz
you want those soldiers focused on
buying furniture, not running a military
coup. That's what they're doing. So, the
unification happens in mid-September
1990.
And here's the Polish borders.
At the end of World War II,
Stalin moved Poland 200 km to the west
and it winds up taking a third of German
territory by time that's all over. And
so, the Germans uh don't really want to
sign all that away. And in addition, as
part of that, there were 12 million
German refugees who were thrown out of
where they were living to send them back
to Germany of whom 2 million died. So,
this is a big deal and it's in living
memory. Germany agrees to this. That the
borders are done, German Polish borders
are set.
Complicating factor, a month and a half
before this unification treaty is
signed, Saddam Hussein decides he's
going to invade Kuwait. Because he's
broke, because he's had a long war with
Iran, huge debts, many owed to Kuwait,
which he doesn't want to pay back. So,
if you invade them, that solves that
problem. And also, he would take over
Kuwait's very rich oil fields and
together that would make Iraq probably
the swing producer of oil. So, he thinks
that's a great idea.
Except the Cold War's over.
Actually, and the Russians are more than
willing to cooperate with the United
States. Gorbachev really needs more
money.
And he is willing to go along with Iraq
out of Kuwait, but not with regime
change in Iraq. Cuz think about Iraq is
a very important creditor state to the
Soviet Union. It owed them between 10
and 13 billion dollars. That's a lot of
money for a broke creditor. But
Gorbachev is being extraordinarily
cooperative with Bush Sr. He sends
Evgeny Primakov on multiple missions to
Baghdad. The first one, Primakov gets
all Russian hostages out of um
Iraq. And then on the second trip, he
gets all Westerners out, Americans
included. Third trip, not so lucky. He's
there for the for the coalition force
bombing. I don't think he liked that
very much. Um but imagine that bombing
going on if they were Western human
shields going down with every target.
Russia took that card right off the
table. And here's some of the reasoning.
Sergey Tarasenko was an aide to Foreign
Minister Shevardnadze. And um
they understood that the United States
was going to do something about this
invasion of of Kuwait. And
uh so
the Russians thought it'll be better if
we force all of this to go through the
UN
where Russia has a veto power. And he
said, "Look, um there was a division of
roles. It extends to China, the help
that Russia provided. Uh when the
Americans asked us to work with the
Chinese, we told the Chinese, 'Think
about it. You're one of the big five
with veto power. You It doesn't it suit
your interest to funnel everything
through the UN where you can put your
foot down?' And the Chinese came around
to that idea. Um however, the Russians
had red lines. And here's Anatoly
Kovalev again, the Deputy Foreign
Ministry. The red line is American
troops stay out of Iraq.
No regime change in Iraq. You do that
and you will tank
curt- termination of the cold uh Cold
War. And that would be the goal of the
the uh the goal. Here's Kovalev saying,
"I advance the basic principle that we
must support the territorial integrity
of Iraq.
This was our sacred position. Uh but we
uh must not permit a division of Iraq."
So if you wonder why the ground war
ended after 100 hours, this is it. That
um
the the the big thing out there is war
termination of the Cold War. That's the
big thing. Saddam uh Hussein
Hussein is a minor event over there.
Sorry, but he was. Anyway, um so and if
it had tanked Cold War termination or
upset uh the reunification of Germany,
France and Britain might have been very
happy. Because Francois Mitterrand, who
was the president of France, and
Margaret Thatcher, Prime Minister of
Britain, were against German
unification. They knew it would
marginalize
their own country. I mean, Germany's
going to be a bigger economy, which it
is. Um but Francois Mitterrand
eventually found solace in expanding the
European Union uh European Community to
the European Union
when you're incorporating all these
Eastern uh
That's what I have for you this evening.
>> [applause]
>> So I've been trying to hire a writer for
the podcast, but I ended up getting way
more applications than I anticipated.
But as I started to go through them, I
noticed that many of them didn't feel
like they were actually written and
submitted by real human beings. So I
started looking for a way to detect
botted submissions. And I ended up using
Sardine.
Sardine was built to assess customer
risk for banking and retail. But it's
also useful for spotting fraudulent job
apps. Implementation was hilarious and
straightforward. It took my general
manager, Max, less than an hour to vibe
code Sardine's SDK into our hiring flow.
Now, Sardine is assigning every single
application we get a risk score based on
a ton of different rules and signals.
Did the candidate use a throwaway email?
Is the device they're on already
associated with another application? Is
the candidate's IP address matching the
country that they said they're from? The
list goes on. I'm just using a basic web
form, but you can integrate Sardine into
any application. So if you need help
with risk, whether that's for hiring or
any other type of fraud prevention, go
to sardine.ai/
for cash. And ask your ATS if they're
using Sardine. All right, back to Sarah.
Sarah, thank you so much for doing this.
Thank you for having me. That would be
the more important thing.
There's an interesting question of why
the Soviet Union collapsed when it did.
I think um
the even more interesting question is
why a system that was so centrally
planned, monstrously inefficient,
brutal, a colonial land empire, how such
a country could survive for so long into
the 20th century.
Um so I I I feel like that's the thing
that actually needs explanation. How did
this regime last for 74 years?
But there are loads of dysfunctional
places all over the planet that have
been dysfunctional forever. And you
look, well, why are they dysfunctional?
And um
I I you look at To me, the it's the that
one in a way is the example of North
Korea. You go, of all countries that
should fall, a place that has ongoing
famines in the 21st century and it used
to be the richest part of the Korean
Peninsula.
So
uh these authoritarian regimes are
really good at uh maintaining the
coercive powers. But think about it. In
order to educate someone, it takes years
as a parent to bring up a little person
and then you get them educated and maybe
they're an A-list poss- uh politician,
it takes seconds to assassinate them.
It's the asymmetry between construction
and destruction. Destruction is so easy
that these guys are uh
uh dictators uh tend to be
uh the dictatorships are all over the
world. It's a It's a sad part of the
human condition. They clearly know what
they're up to. In the case of um
the Soviet Union, there were multiple
intelligence organizations. That's what
Stalin was using to keep track on
everyone. So you want to monopolize
information so that you know more
information than other people. And then
they have a whole bunch of people who
are the winners of the nomenklatura, are
the elites there. You make sure you pay
all them off. And
I mean, think about it. Human society,
slave, serf. I mean, we humans have been
doing these things to each other for a
long time.
So dictatorships can certainly sustain
themselves for a long time. But the
Soviet Union was special in that by the
'60s and '70s, they have a GNP that's
60% of America's. This incredibly
dynamic economy. Um in the '40s and
'50s, they have much higher growth
rates. So much so that prominent
economists like Paul Samuelson are
saying that by the '90s, based on what
they're seeing at the time, um the
Soviet Union will have a bigger economy
than America. And this is just quite
surprising that they would have such
high growth rates. Um if you just think
about how central planning works, people
are going to tell you how much steel you
can make and which company gets to use
the cotton fabric and cement and etc.
And you have hundreds of millions of
people living under this system. And it
has It's just actually quite shocking
that they actually had notable growth
rates after World War II for decades on
end. Well, first of all,
it's a war economy, essentially. You're
putting all your money so you have a big
military and Russia wants to find
greatness. This is part of it, of being
a big power and it's military power with
territory.
So um and most countries in wartime have
uh they mobilize for the military,
right? This country did it in World War
II. All kinds of rationing, right? Uh
we're not using market prices. You're
setting different prices, giving people
ration cards and things. The thing is
about the Soviets is they kept it
forever. They never got rid of it. So,
that's one piece. Another problem with
the Soviet Union are all of the data.
So, I don't know what data you've seen
and I know the data I've seen is it's
hard to know because
because not the ruble is a
non-convertible currency and a lot of
things they measure in weight and other
things. Like they're the greatest TV
producer in the world, they said. Why?
Cuz they made the heaviest TVs in the
world.
Right? I'm serious. When I was there,
this was it and they would spontaneously
combust, which is not the normal thing a
TV should do for you. Burn down the
apartment building. So,
so they're going to measure their heavy
TVs as a positive.
And the ruble is non-convertible. So,
there was a guy named Murray Feshbach
and I can't remember which part of the
US government he was, but he was really
good at looking at their statistics and
then adjusting them. What people didn't
know and I gave you the CIA ones where
the CIA, they're not stupid people.
They've got the best data they could
find and they're coming up with 20% of
the Soviet budget is probably devoted to
military. Then after the Cold War is
over, they're going, "Whoops, we missed
it. At least double that and maybe
triple." So, it's really hard to know
even with the statistics you're getting.
Certainly what Paul Samuelson had
wouldn't be accurate. It's just a guess.
Well, my favorite example of this is um
So, there were top-down commands that
you had to produce a certain amount of
steel and a steel factory would then be
incentivized to make thicker bars of
steel rather than thinner bars because
that would count towards greater
production. Except a lot of inputs
actually do require the thinner sheets.
So, then the other factories have to
thin down the steel, but that also
counts towards GDP.
>> [laughter]
>> So, producing the inefficient steel and
then cutting it down to size is both
being double counted towards GDP.
>> Well, just the whole waste of it. You're
like the heavy TVs, they probably have
four times the inputs that they need to
make them that would be good for other
things. Yeah, it's a this notion that
you can actually plan an economy. Prices
are a miracle. Good old Adam Smith, the
magic hand, right? Or the invisible
hand, that was what it was.
That prices are the way to go and
markets
it's more efficient. I wonder if one
thing that's going on is in the early
and mid-20th century, you have economies
which are much simpler at least compared
to today. So, even then obviously
commanding and control is less workable
than capitalism, but if you just have
heavy industry, you need a certain
amount of cement, steel, concrete,
uh fabrics, coal. And that's much more
workable than like we got to essentially
command what SaaS tools your enterprise
is allowed to use. Oh, yeah. Well, it's
interesting on the development thing.
So, the communists have insisted on
heavy industry. That's the thing that
they want. Forget about the consumer
goods. If you look at the countries that
really have made it, like Japan uh in
the Meiji Restoration, they're doing a
lot of light industry and consumer
goods. And then they move into heavy,
but they've already got people on
bicycles and they got textiles and other
things up and running. And that would
also apply to Taiwan and Korea. And they
and they do by all means they do get
heavy industry, but that's not the
starter program. The starter program is
basic standard of living. And it turns
out and I don't know economists, but it
turns out if you just look at who's rich
and who's not that that seems to be more
workable thing. Yeah. There's also the
fact that
the centralized regime is building
things according to the '30s plan. And
even after post-war reconstruction,
they're still calling back on these
plans from the '30s that call for heavy
industry for a bygone era. And in the
'70s, '80s, we have our rust belt
collapse of manufacturing. And people
complain about this as, "Look, the US
has this hollowed-out manufacturing
base." But it's much better to have
industries which are left behind so that
the whole economy as a whole can be more
dynamic and move on than the Soviet
Union where the entire thing became a
rust belt, right? Because they couldn't
move on.
>> It's more exciting than that. And again,
I'm not an economist, but apparently
they missed the plastics revolution.
Uh where I mean, think about our own
lives. You got Now we're finding we have
too many plastics, but it's in a plastic
an incredible material and they're just
missing that. I remember
in Russia trying to figure out where to
get sour cream and was being laughed at
by Russians cuz I was so stupid in the
store that I couldn't find it.
Well, we have
little plastic tubs with the sour cream.
And back in the late '80s and I was
there, you had to bring your glass jar
with you so you could hand it over the
counter so someone could take a filthy
ladle and fill up your jar. I mean, this
is part of not having plastics. And then
they totally missed the computer uh
revolution and that is um this plays
into Ronald Reagan winning the the
military race is we're putting these
chips and things into our ballistic
missiles and they can't do that. And
that's a problem. Mhm. Speaking of
plastics, I didn't realize before
preparing for this lecture the
overwhelming role that oil played Oh,
yeah. in first explaining why the Soviet
Union was able to sustain itself for so
long and then why it collapsed. So,
by the late '50s, Soviet growth rates
are already starting to go down,
especially compared to the post-war boom
that America's experiencing. And in '59,
they discovered these massive oil fields
in Siberia.
And then from '73 to '85, I think 80% of
Soviet Union's
hard currency earnings are just from oil
and they use this because central
planning can't produce even grain, let
alone advanced technology. They use this
to import a bunch of stuff to sustain
the Red Army, to sustain the population,
to subsidize Eastern Europe. Um and then
of course, prices collapsed in 1985.
Um
do you think that if the the Siberian
reserves aren't found in the late '50s,
that it's possible that the Soviet Union
would have collapsed 30 years prior?
Uh I don't know, but they would have had
they wouldn't have been able to do all
the Africa program and things. It just
would be too expensive. So, certainly it
would have been a reduced thing. What
it's also it it is also the gas reserves
that got up. It's for like North Central
Soviet Union. I can't remember the
places, but this is the gas that gets
used to get pumped to Europe cuz that's
the better place. And they make those
big investments and it takes a while for
them to pay off. And that was a big deal
because they needed help from Western
oil companies or whatever. Whoever does
the gas pipelines, compressors, whatever
it is you need. And there was a big
to-do about that, about whether we
should sell the stuff or whether we
shouldn't sell the stuff. Europeans
wanted to sell, we were trying not to.
This is going under under Reagan as
well. But anyway, they had built a lot
of it and it was essential to their
pocket change. But then when they got
all the pocket change, they never saved
any of it. They just whatever the oil
wealth was, they spent up to the max.
Doesn't it sound familiar? Mhm. Right?
Governments, you have money, you spend
it, forget about rainy days. Mhm.
Um
After the Soviet Union collapses,
there was a period when Putin was still
winning somewhat free elections between
And then so if you look at the
why Russia's economy recovers and why
Putin is so popular in the 2000s, from
2000 to 2008, oil goes from $10 a barrel
to $140 a barrel. Um
And so this goes to your point about we
give credit or blame to political
leaders for often what are just long-run
macro trends. Well, what I didn't cover
is when the Soviet Union collapses,
uh Soviet living standards, just Russian
living standards implode and it's a mess
for 20 years. It is just unbelievably
difficult. Oh, and another piece of the
brilliant Soviet management, in order to
maintain control over the empire,
instead of building things all in a
place, you build some plane parts here,
some plane parts there, some plane parts
all over the empire. So, when the empire
goes, great, I've got a quarter of a
plane and then,
you know, where do I get the other
parts? So, all of that fell
So, when Putin suddenly has a lot of on
people cuz initially there's plenty of
money, Russian standard of livings do go
up. And so of course, they like him and
they give it and give him credit for all
of that. But then that runs its course,
right? And then it's less good and then
he's more excited about
Well,
it's his mindset anyway. When you get
more money, you want to get the empire
back. Mhm. And then Russians also like
that, right? Speaking of the empire, um
you know, the Russia's economy just has
this terrible period after the collapse
of the Soviet Union. A lot of the um
Eastern European satellites seem to
recover in this gangbusters way.
Obviously East Germany, but even Poland
today is such a big success story.
What's what's going wrong with the
mainland itself that
these other countries are able to
recover from communism much faster?
>> Well, they had been always much more
connected to Western Europe.
Czechoslovakia before the war is a
full-up highly developed country,
absolutely tied to the West. Poland, I
believe Copernicus is from a place like
Poland, right? It's a center of the
enlightenment. But
when I was using the
uh George Bush Senior archives, it's
fascinating. So, it's '88, '89 when the
Soviet Union's imploding and then
there's a lot of correspondence between
Eastern European particularly Polish
leaders coming to the Bush
administration saying, "Hey, our banking
system, we know it's a mess. Our
financial system's a mess. We know we
need expertise to help us figure out
what our legal system is going to look
like." And Bush is all over that and I'm
sure he farmed them out to the private
sector who would also be all over that
like giving them free consulting. And so
as a result, you do have them really
taking advantage of this 20 years.
At the same time when Bush would have
loved to have given some of the same
advice and there were people like
Jeffrey Sachs and others who went to the
Soviet Union but it was not remotely the
same thing. This is a people throughout
Polish society requesting this advice
not like one guy with an office in
Moscow.
And basically the Russians thought they
knew it all.
And they thought they understood. This
is all the unknown unknowns, the things
you don't understand, your blind spots.
Truly economics is a blind spot for the
Soviets cuz think about it. When the
czars ran the show, it's like a riff off
the Mongol Empire of you take cuts from
people's businesses of trade that comes
through and then it's also about selling
basic commodities. It's not you're not
thinking of under the czars Russia doing
high-end manufacturers. I mean, I guess
Fabergé and some jewelry if you want to
do that but that you
really that's not it.
And so it doesn't have this a commercial
being tied into of this commercial
tradition of Western Europe and all the
sea routes for trade. And so then when
you get the communists, they aren't
about that at all. So there's a really a
dearth of knowledge or think about in
this country with all the little kids
selling lemonade, right? You see them on
the streets. They're already learn or
the kids who are doing newspaper routes,
they're already learning about buying
things, selling things at a very and we
just take this
knowledge for granted. It's just absent
or was absent in this in the Soviet
Union.
And not as much absent in Eastern Europe
that had been more connected in. Okay,
so I I should ask before we get to the
period of Russian collapse, let's go
back to the end of the Soviet period. Um
Gorbachev starts instituting these
economic reforms along with glasnost and
perestroika.
But what I find mysterious is those
economic reforms not only fail to
prevent the stagnation that the Soviet
Union is experiencing but they in fact
make things worse. So it
you would think that reform even if it's
handled badly would have some sort of
positive impact and if you do it badly
then it'll have a smaller positive
impact but here just like causes this
huge hyperinflation
um causes all these problems. So why did
reform have this backwards impact? Well,
A, there's so much that needs reforming
there. And but part of it I think
because he wanted to do political
reforms, that's what he understands. As
a human being, that would be with the
thing that he's very familiar with.
Think about it. He's like an A-list
member of the Communist Party to be the
guy when they do generational change,
he's the one. So he's obviously very
astute at that level but the problem is
economics. So he's giving away political
power before he's fixed the economic
problems. And so China's conclusion is
there is no way you're going to touch
political power. They're going to hang
on to that and then deal with whatever
as much of the economics as they're
going to deal with.
But that's part of it but part of it is
there's no tradition for all of these
things.
And and then you go, well, how did
Russia get this way? Well, it's a very
difficult to address. It prior to the
Industrial Revolution, it's flat. Uh
neighbors all invade and so you needed a
big army in order to defeat them. Okay,
a big army's going to want a war
economy, right? Historically, you're
going to want to support a big land
force and that's going to I mean, this
is my take and others who are actually
experts on these various periods of
Russian history can come up with
something else but I think it's you're
funneling you're channeling your
economics into that whereas you're
looking at Europe and particularly
Britain, it's merchants. I got that they
got a big aristocracy who are not going
to dirty themselves with buying and
selling stuff but there are a tremendous
number of very rich merchants in Britain
that are going to influence government
laws and things which is not going to
take place. And then what's nice about
the navy for Britain is you send them
away. They're not going to run a coup in
the capital because they're off on the
ship somewhere and there aren't that
many of them compared to a standing
army. So I suspect, I can't prove this,
that this leads to different outcomes.
Or contributes to. One theory I heard of
that is complementary theory to your
theory is that Gorbachev is instituting
reforms because he thinks there should
be decentralized and certain democratic
decision but he doesn't fundamentally
believe in the market system. So he's
delegating power to these quasi firms.
Um at the same time he thinks the price
system is immoral, private property is
immoral. So they can't intermediate
between themselves using real prices. So
then how do these firms intermediate?
Well, there's corruption, right? If you
can't use actual prices and property to
figure out who gets what allocation of
scarce resources, you just it just
backroom dealing which makes the problem
worse. Well, there's no legal system and
you need a legal system and legal
systems take a long time to develop. So
you're telling the Soviet Union, okay,
communism is down and now you need a
like chop chop, we need a fast we need a
a new uh
uh legal system. It's not going to
happen.
Um Okay, so you were mentioning the
problem that Eastern European countries
especially had which is that they're
going more and more into debt um because
they're not able to produce globally
competitive exports.
Um and in order to so they have this
like last ditch effort that we're going
to uh we're going to solve our problems
with some technological miracle. We need
to have go even be even get even more
over leveraged. We'll get some Western
machinery or technology and then we'll
be able to finally produce something
that the world wants. Um
I'm curious up to what point this was a
plausible hope. You know,
through the '80s and even till the end
of the '80s, they still believed that
you know, Czechoslovakia or East Germany
or something could catch up with West
Europe in terms They're desperate,
right? It's Think about it. If you're a
communist leader,
how many other cards are there to play?
You're looking, okay, this is the only
card I got. And they're doing other
things because of the social unrest,
they want to import food and consumer
products because they've been so
neglected these things.
So and then there's another piece which
is um
VCRs, you know, the videos. All of a
sudden those things came around. I
remember uh this so we're in Soviet
Union the academic year of 1988-89
and had um
one of my classmates had been an English
language tutor of this person in Moscow
set me up because that was the only way
to get a good meal once a week. I would
do for a for a meal, I would do talk
English for an hour. And uh
Yeah, that the what that family wanted
more than anything else is a VCR player
and they had a diplomatic um
you could have hard currency and buy at
the diplomatic whatever it was. So I
basically um got them a VCR by going to
the diplomatic thing with my very
limited foreign currency, bought an over
overpriced VCR for them and they got all
kinds of meals for the rest of the year.
But but it meant that they could all of
a sudden get Western movies and um there
are things like in movies where oh, like
there'll be a picture of I don't know, a
fugitive running by I don't know, the
fruit section of the Berkeley Bowl. And
>> [laughter]
>> the Russians would be
you know, I just it's unbelievable
the um
I think that Raisa Gorbachev,
Gorbachev's wife when she came and
visited, she must have realized that a
welfare mother on food stamps had better
buying power than she did by just being
able to have access to Walmart. Right? I
think the elites as they're traveling
and I have no statistical data on this
but as you travel, it's like I'm
comparing me getting sour cream in a
jar
and oh yeah, that was the other thing.
Counting up all the things in a Soviet
uh supermarket
and the total was something like 77
items total in this supermarket. I don't
think that compares favorably to a candy
rack as you leave I don't know a
7-Eleven, right? And oh yeah, when you
went by the meat section, the smell just
about knocked you out of rotten meat. It
was really disgusting.
Yeah, I got to make I got really good at
making borscht. Go to the peasant
market, pay hard currency for bones cuz
couldn't afford any meat but I could
afford the bones. And then would buy
Russians produce really good sugar
beets. Got beets and then you're
starting to get rotten apples over the
winter but they at least come from
Hungary. Russians don't need to produce
apples in those days but Hungarians did.
And uh the Romanians provided the tommic
canned tomatoes and I could do a
credible borscht. But you're talking
about
this is Moscow, the center of
everything.
And we're we're dealing I remember
buying potatoes at the market and the
rotten spots felt gelatinous.
So you'd have to cut those out and then
you're wondering how much how many
nutrients are in the rest of that
potato. It was a really gross year. And
then yeah, I remember going to the candy
store and I I mean, I
I'm just I would buy caramel from Poland
or somewhere. It was like a food item
because it was actually edible.
At this point I bet you were wondering
why you didn't write a biography of
Napoleon and so you could just visit
Paris instead.
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah, well, my brother's comment is
you're studying Russia and China, two
countries in the breakdown lane.
>> [laughter]
>> Um by the way, the the the the point
about the
the grocery stores having 74 items um is
interesting in two ways. One,
central control works much better if you
have a much smaller amount of items to
optimize over. So, if you have things
are standardized, you know, they they
can work much better. And second, to
your point about GDP being hard to
compare between the Soviets and the
United States, how do you compare a
round tomato or a round potato
to the Idaho ones that you can get in
>> Oh, they would compare it by pound.
>> Exactly, right? Also, you said you were
there in '88 and '89. So, this is before
the Berlin Wall has fallen.
>> I was watching tenement fall, the
tenement demonstrations on Soviet TV,
and the only reason you got that TV
coverage is cuz Gorbachev was in
Beijing. So, all the press was there.
That's why you have the coverage, and
they stayed on because the students were
demonstrating, and the Chinese closed
society weren't aware of power of
television, of Guys, they're going to
film you do doing all of this stuff, and
they will get the film out. Mhm. Okay,
in '88,
uh was the mood Obviously, things are
going terribly, but did people realize
that they're only 2 years away or 3
years away from the complete
>> No. dissolution of the Soviet Union?
>> No. Well, maybe the end of the Soviet
Union, but there was such optimism of
thinking, We're finally going to be a
full up democratic country. It's be
wonderful. With no sense of the work
schedules that go into a capitalist
economy, that to create the wealth in
this country, a lot of people are
working far more than 40 hours a week.
Right? And particularly as they're
getting started, working enormous hours.
And that was not something that was
in most people's mind. I mean, sure, the
kids who became the ballerinas in the
Bolshoi are working long hours to do
that. But as an economy as a whole, I
don't
they didn't understand the source of
wealth and had any inkling of all the
things that are missing, not least of
which is No one's got the right
education. Great, you got Marx
memorized. That does you zero good. Um
So, around this time is when people are
finally learning about what actually
happened during the Stalinist period.
>> Oh, yeah. Um So, people are optimistic
that, well, we can sort of have a
changing of the guard, and maybe things
will improve. But at the same time,
they're learning about how terrible
their history actually was. So, between
between these two things,
and also at some point, they must
realize through the '90s that things are
actually aren't improving. In fact,
they're getting worse.
>> fell apart. Yeah, so what is the
inflection point at which the mood is
just
uh uh
>> wasn't living there. I was thinking that
there would be impending problems as a,
I don't know, Chicken Little American.
The sky is falling, the sky is falling,
right? Americans always think disaster's
coming. I sort of fit in that crowd. Um
but I think there was a lot of optimism
and exuberance, thinking, We have the
freedom to really understand our history
and what's happening. This is in
um of educated
uh people, people with college degrees
in uh Moscow and St. Petersburg. Now,
what's going on in the rest of the
country is undoubtedly a different
story, because they had
as bad as living in Moscow was, living
in the countryside was going back in
time far further. So,
um
those people weren't living well at all.
>> Yeah. And it's going to get really bad
for them. Okay, so people are learning
about these things for the first time.
Is the sense that they kind of suspected
I mean, every people have family, they
they must have known my uncle was
He was off in this little mining town
that he was forced to go to for a decade
right there after what was
>> yeah, yeah.
>> But so, did were they totally shocked,
or was there some sense that things were
pretty bad, and now we're just learning
the extent to it?
>> Oh, I think there was a an understanding
it was terrible, but I think there's
this exuberance of thinking, It's going
to get mad It's going to get much
better. And then the disappointment is
equally extreme. And then there was this
feeling that, Well, the West owes us,
because how could I mean,
that you're all really rich, and you now
owe us to fix everything. And the
counterargument to that is, No, you are
an enormous migraine. You set back all
of these countries across the globe back
in time with this non-functioning
communist model that you peddled around
there. And now you want extra aid.
Um
And the problem was I think we wanted to
do some of the aid, but they're not
going to be receptive to it. I think
that was another conclusion with the
Bush administration, is that if we
dumped a lot of money in, it would just
go straight into corruption. That there
you need a legal structure and in order
to place money, and they just plain
didn't have it. That was another thing
that was worrying the Bush
administration, there's nowhere to put
the money. Mhm. Okay, speaking of these
different countries that the Soviets and
the United States were competing for
during the Cold War,
you you had this presentation where you
say, Look, Reagan alone didn't do
this. But I wonder if the broader lesson
is just like,
nothing any US president did in terms of
foreign policy, that was all a sideshow.
This tête-à-tête competition for, you
know, different Third World countries,
we're going to get Brazil, we're going
to get Vietnam, we're going to get
Algeria, etc. That just seems
much less significant than the fact that
liberal capitalism was more appealing
and outproduced communism. So, even if
some country even if Brazil goes
communist, this is not going to change
the fundamental
the fundamental playing board here.
>> If you do not protect the liberal
economies of Europe, you're not going to
have anywhere to play the the liberal
economic game. And also, Japan, and one
of the reasons you feel that liberal
economies work is you got economic
miracles going on in Japan, Korea,
Taiwan, Singapore, and Hong Kong back in
the day. So, if you abandon those
places,
also in the Cold War, there was a
tremendous amount of economic growth
across the world, and particularly in
the Third World. Why? Because in past,
if there's a civil war, whoever's losing
either comes to us or comes to the
Russians and says, Help us. So, whoever
it is helps, and then the other side
feels obliged to help, and then you're
just destroying wealth ever more
rapidly. And that was going The Cold War
was anything but cold in the Third
World. Tens of millions of people died
in these conflicts. So, when you end
that, all of a sudden, they can start
compounding growth. So, there's a
problem with allowing someone
not countering someone who's going to
impose communist systems all over the
place. And communist systems are really
good
at putting dictators into power in a
civil war situation. It's very
effective. That's how Mao gets into
power. And if the problem is, Okay, then
they win the civil war, they're in
power, they annihilate the opposition,
but it then it produces comp uh
compounding poverty thereafter.
>> So, there's this conundrum, and I I I
generally don't know the answer to this,
but
um in order to beat off these communist
factions and guerrillas, we often
through the Cold War had to support um
other dictators. And I think probably in
many cases, they were
better than the communist alternative.
It's just very hard to beat Pol Pot and
Mao in terms of how terrible you can be.
But obviously, this was um in its own
way problematic. Uh and even if we
didn't have to support dictators, we had
to alienate um
you had this previous lecture that you
gave on the Indo-Pakistani chapter in
history, where we had to alienate India
in order to fend off against the Soviet
Union in this
in this little episode. So, I I I mean,
I don't know what the solution to this
is. I mean, if you think that this
theater mattered less, then you could
say, Well, we should have just kept our
hands clean of these different um Third
World countries. But to your point,
well, if you want to be able to show
that these countries can experience
growth under capitalism, then you want
them to not be under the subjugation of
communists. But then you have to support
sometimes objectionable regimes.
>> Well, I think you had a more optimistic
generation, ironically optimistic. The
people who had survived World War II,
there was a real generosity.
Uh um
I mean, American servicemen,
uh and women, but when I say servicemen,
they were welcomed all over Europe, and
uh they were adored in Europe, right?
And uh
they came back They were a very generous
group of people. They They were Others
felt generous to them. That's when the
GI Bill was passed and saying, Okay,
you've saved everyone. So, therefore,
we're going to give you college
educations,
uh extend home loans to you, not to
African Americans. They were excluded
from this, which is a problem, but
um others, white Americans, weren't. And
um it led to massive economic growth
where people who never had a college
education, their family, they did, and
they all of a sudden, instead of having
really hard manual labor, um this real
optimism. And then it extended to
foreign countries. This is when this
country was tremendously generous to
others, and it worked very well for us.
And think about the Marshall Plan. It
looks really generous, putting all this
money into Europe. Uh we made a fortune
off of it, as did Europe. It's You're
looking If you're smart, you're looking
for win-wins, of things where you both
benefit, because that'll incentivize the
other side to join in. This is basic
strategy. And this is one of the reasons
I've got problems with the United States
has turned to zero-sum approaches, where
I'm going to get everything, you get
nothing, and then I look so smart when
we do the clickbait on this moment where
I get everything and you get nothing.
It's much smarter. And then the other
piece is that a lot of things don't pay
off immediately. So, George Bush is not
reelected president. He absolutely
deserved to be
um because what he did, the payoff was
huge
ending the Cold War on Western terms,
but it doesn't pay off in time for the
next election. I think this is where
Americans um miss it is you're looking
at what someone does on a given day when
the real implications are what's going
to happen in a decade. Like on tax
policy, if we keep racking up on our
debt, it it it may get us out of the
corner today, but is it going to really
back us into a corner later on? And this
is where Americans uh need to think a
little harder about long-term
implications of things.
Um
I I thought that when you pointed out
that it would cost 60 billion uh
uh Deutsche marks for
West Germany to pay Gorbachev to
basically let him or not let him, but
let East Germany join West Germany.
Um
that's a lot of money, but if you think
about decades and decades of future
growth, it's just like it's it's a huge
bargain, right? So,
it's a mistake to think about um how
expensive things seem at the moment.
It's just like another huge country that
you've turned.
>> Well, what's there's a statement that
politicians think of the next election,
statesmen think of the next generation.
George Bush and Helmut Kohl are
statesmen. They're thinking of the next
generation and the group that fought
World War II also many of uh US and also
uh allied leaders were statespeople.
They're thinking of the next generation.
Or if you're thinking of them
where I've got uh Mitterrand who's a who
is uh negotiating the Maastricht Treaty
about the European Union. That is
statesperson's work of what's the next
generation. So,
um
it's important and we haven't held our
political uh
it's been um we need more statesmen,
statespeople. Mhm. Or political leaders.
To try a different thesis on you. Um
through this period the Soviet Union is
also trying to buy off um
other countries um especially when it
thinks its economy can grow and
especially when oil So, after the '73
oil crisis, um oil prices um
just skyrocket and this is why some
Soviet citizens remember the Brezhnev
era favorably. It's just that oil made
it possible for
um
the Soviets to not only import stuff,
but also
to through the Brezhnev period actually
there's a net export of resources to
Eastern Europe and satellites rather
than the other way around.
>> That's probably their data. You know,
that's the the I I get it. Their oil
really subsidized, but everything in the
Soviet Union that was worth having came
from somewhere else.
is how do you measure it, right? And
they're just going to measure it by
weight or something else that doesn't
really capture what they're getting. But
but the larger question being that it's
not like the Soviet Union didn't think
of doing things like the Marshall Plan.
Obviously nothing to that extent, but
this idea that you can win people's
favors by providing them military aid,
providing them um foreign aid. It's just
that they didn't have the resources and
to do it to [clears throat] the extent
that the US could.
That's true, but there's a real coercive
piece, too. Is if you mess with them,
it'll be really ugly.
Economics is such a big part of the
story of why the Soviet Union fell apart
that if you don't look at the numbers,
you really can't understand this
lecture. There's this resource like this
that Sarah has that shows the yearly
budget deficits and declines in GDP that
you saw in the late '80s in the Soviet
Union. And the numbers show just how
massive the oil bust actually was. But
you can't tell this just from a glance
at a table. So, we wanted a way to
visualize the data to make the trends
super clear when we released the
episode. Google's image generation tool
Nano Banana Pro has been extremely
useful for this. In this case we just
took a screenshot of this slide from
Sarah and asked Nano Banana to make line
graphs from it and it did it perfectly.
Of course, oil wasn't the only reason
the Soviet Union fell apart. Another big
reason was the Sino-Soviet split. The
border between China and Russia is
enormous and took a massive percentage
of the Soviet Union's GDP to defend it.
We found this helpful map of the '69
border conflict on Wikipedia, but it's
dense and hard to read if it's just on
screen for a few seconds. So, again we
just had Nano Banana clean it up. And
now it's much easier to see the border
itself and also where some of the
fighting took place. You can try Nano
Banana Pro now in the Gemini app. Go to
gemini.google.com
to get started. All right, back to
Sarah.
Okay, here's what I don't understand
about the arms build-up during the Cold
War. So, um the Soviet Union is spending
I think 2% of their GDP just on nuclear
weapons alone at its peak.
And um arms control advocates will make
this clip, which is that look, we've
already got enough weapons to destroy
the world many times over. Why do we
need more? But I I that is sort of an
interesting question. Um why what what
was the point of spending so much of GDP
on the marginal nuclear weapon or
marginal weapon system? I don't know the
answer, but I
I've read the you read the plans about
these things and you wonder what people
are thinking. Like um we were trying to
develop tactical nukes. There was only a
little trick with that that whoever
deployed it would be within the blast
range of the tactical nuke and you're
going,
oh,
who develops a weapon like that?
Apparently we did. Luckily we didn't
deploy it.
Um I don't know the answer of
uh why we had such massive redundancy in
these uh nuclear weapons, why the
arsenals were so massive and
I don't know the story on how you
maintain these things and
uh how long they last and
it it it doesn't make much more sense to
me than it does to you.
Um okay, another question. So,
Sino-Soviet split, this huge diplomatic
coup um
where
the Soviets have to put a million
soldiers on the Siberian front against
uh China and they had to spend 2% of GDP
just stationing and garrisoning this
area. Um which is obviously a lot. Um
that's often what many countries spend
on defense as a whole, let alone just on
along one front. At the same time, 2%
GDP, well, if they just had
one or two more years of extra economic
growth or faster growth, that could make
up for this huge diplomatic coup. So,
again this goes back to the question of
are you know,
if some domestic policy just costs
slightly higher economic growth rates,
that would make up for the biggest
diplomatic coup of the entire Cold War,
which goes back to the economy first,
diplomacy second. Well, A um
I have real problems with the statistics
and I can only
this is
I got a what is it? Sample size of one.
Wah. So,
>> [laughter]
>> I remember living in Moscow. It was so
backwards. It's just breathtakingly
backwards
in just about every way imaginable from
just uh yeah, they got a big fancy
subway system looks remarkably retro and
yeah, at least it works. But uh the
consumer goods were so awful, the
quality was so bad. You look at the
buildings themselves. I get it, they
make nuclear weapons. Do they make
anything else? Their cars were a joke,
their Ladas or whatever they were.
Um it's thing after thing. And so,
you're looking at all their stats cuz
that's what they are telling you that
we're so great and if you it really is
an emperor wears no clothes moment. The
finally the little kids goes, oh, you're
actually naked.
Or I can give you an example. These
acquaintances in Moscow were talking
about uh hospitals outside of Moscow
that some of them didn't have running
water.
How do you have a hospital without
running water?
I don't even know how that's even
conceivable. Or
when their kid had put her hand through
I don't know, glass door or something
and they wanted to get her stitched up
cuz you're she's bleeding, not going to
die, but she's probably bleeding all
over the place and they bring her to one
place and oh, they got no thread to do
the stitches. So, then they have to go
to another place.
And who runs a country like this?
All right, you convinced me. BART is
acceptable. I'll stick here. The subway
is not a big deal. I don't want to move
to Moscow.
Um
okay, so uh while the Eastern European
satellites are trying to
leave the Soviet Union, this has
happened many times through the 20th
century, right? So, um Hungary in 1956,
uh Czechoslovakia in '68, Poland through
Solidarity, um and every previous time
there's a many million person strong Red
Army stationed in Eastern Europe left
over from World War II which rolls in
the tanks and prevents these
uh revolutions from taking place. So,
what happens in the late '80s and early
'90s that um
the Red Army is still there. There's
still millions of Red Army soldiers.
They just don't shoot. Yeah,
generational change. A, the leaders
don't have the stomach for it anymore. I
don't know how you'd feel about sending
tanks and going, oh, we're going to
splatter all these people. I think for
many Americans that would not be the
choice that they would make. And so,
this ruthless generation is gone.
Another piece is Gorbachev had traveled
and I think he had
uh some Czech friends and I can't
remember all his his list of friends,
but um
they'd been horrified by Czechoslovakia
in 1968 as young people watching as
Russian young people watching it and
thinking,
it's just wrong. We shouldn't be doing
this. If if um communism is what it
should be, this is not what should be
happening. And so, this is of their
youth, Gorbachev and his It's not just
him. He reflects a whole generation of
uh communists. And so, they're thinking,
got to be another way. This is just not
right. And so then he thinks he's got
his other way. And so it's this
exuberance of the reforms and things are
happening in Russia. There's a
tremendous feeling of energy and so he's
telling the Poles, you get out of too.
We're all going to do this thing. But
it's um
it's all the expertise and things that
he's missing that he's unaware that he's
missing as are all these other people
cuz how could they have it? They've been
living in a command economy. Okay, this
is this is what I wanted to ask you
about. So you had the
uh Tocqueville quote about how
revolutions happen when governments
start to institute some kind of reform.
Gorbachev is doing perestroika glasnost
and there's the conservative reactionary
parts of the Communist Party, which by
the way is a phrase I wouldn't expect to
have said, but
>> [laughter]
>> um they're uh they're trying to resist
this and so Gorbachev goes about
dismantling the party secretariat um and
instead devolving power down to the
individual republics. And we know what
happens later is that these republics
start to say, "Look, we want our own
country now."
But this raises a question of okay, if
you do inherit
um
a brutal regime and now you say I want
to do reforms
and you know this
dynamic that Tocqueville appointed out,
which is as soon as you start reforms,
actually what it tends to happen is that
you lose power, not that people um
people consolidate it under you. What
actually should you do, right? Cuz
you're like, "I want to be improving
people's lives." But as soon as you try
to do that, the whole thing's going to
fall apart. This is so far above my pay
grade.
>> [laughter]
>> I'm a professor.
I have trouble uh justifying a B+ on a
paper.
>> [laughter]
>> Uh
I'm a a believer in gradual reforms, do
it incrementally. And for the Soviet
Union, it would be gradual legal
reforms, work it through their Duma
slowly.
And uh do it that way, but uh
uh seek out help from the European Union
that has many many experts that would be
overjoyed
if Putin and friends would cease cease
doing their number on Ukraine. Uh and
now the problem is you're going to get
into reparations for what the horrors
they've inflicted. So that ship is
sailed sadly for this generation.
There's no nice ending for Russians.
Uh it's too late and
but um you can look at
Europe itself is improving its
institutions and Ukraine's improving its
institutions. If you think about uh you
what forces you to change uh isn't the
existential threat on Ukraine if they
survive all this? This is forcing them
really to clean up their institutions.
So it's happening rapidly there, but uh
we don't know the end of that story, how
it ends. I do think there's a really
interesting lesson here of whenever we
look at a country from the outside, we
have this thing of like, "Well, just
just reform everything um and just fix
your economy." And whenever we
understand a system better, for example,
in the United States, healthcare is 20%
of GDP and this idea that Trump or Obama
or Biden, whoever could just come in and
be like, "Well, I'll just fix
healthcare." Um we recognize that this
is a wildly implausible thing to happen,
but then we have this expectation that
in Russia, Gorbachev or Yeltsin could
have just been like, "This is 100 100%
of my economy is messed up. Now I'm just
going to fix it." American hubris. Uh
and actually think about our country. We
have the one of the most crazy tax codes
on the planet and neither party can
touch it. Right. Because you touch any
part of it, someone negotiated that
wording exactly. And yet um think of how
much of our economy is taken up by the
overhead of all the tax accountants, all
the misdirected cash in order to take
advantage of something that's simply an
invention of the tax system.
Uh there was years ago when there was
talk of doing a flat tax that wouldn't
that be much more uh
uh efficient? And uh you can imagine
what accountants thought about that one.
And that idea has totally died. Talk
about inefficiency. Uh
I mean, and then we we we realize we
have budgetary problems in this country
and
this would seem to be something that
ought to be on people's radar is clean
up tax code. But isn't it precisely that
many people don't want the radar on the
tax code? And that's why we're wondering
who can get in and out of girls' or
boys' bathrooms.
Right? Instead of looking at the tax
code, which would be the real thing. I
think the answer should be big
deductions for podcasts.
>> [laughter]
>> It should count as research and
development.
Well, Turkish, you're almost to that
stage. You're you need to add a lobbyist
in DC.
>> [laughter]
>> We'll work on it.
Um
Uh so there's a very interesting book
about North Korea. I forgot the title
where the author was pointing out that
um North Korea could not do uh you could
not even start doing reforms today
because as soon as there was some sort
of information um
that from the outside world that North
Koreans could see, which would be part
of any reform, people they would
immediately realize that everything the
government has told them is false, that
South Korea is enormously wealthier,
they have this terrible standard of
living. And obviously um
uh this is the same experience that
Eastern Europeans had uh where literally
in many cases a country that is, you
know, this is the exact same country
that was just bisected in half and the
other half is living so much richer. Um
and in those situations, I guess this
goes back to the question of well, can
you today in North Korea, how would it
even kick off if Kim Jong-un just had a
change of heart or if somebody else came
into power?
They're they're just probably trapped in
this to the extent they want to keep
power. There's nothing they can do.
>> because he's a dead boy if he if he
tries to take a go retirement. Um what
is it? In Asia, there's an I don't know
exactly all of the parts of Asia where
this applies to, so it's some parts. Uh
there's a thought that things last for
three generations and then it's over. So
he's the third generation. And whether
this is true or not doesn't matter. If
you believe it's true,
it [snorts] will become a
self-sufficient self-fulfilling
prophecy. So I'll be interested. Well, I
won't probably live to see it. You in
the room will. Of uh what happens to uh
the Kim family, whether it makes it to
generation four or not. But by their own
belief system, in theory they shouldn't.
So
who knows? Um one more question about
oil. Yeah. Um Based on my big expertise
on oil, [laughter]
I would say zero. Yeah, okay. Um
[snorts]
during this period between '73 and '85
when they have these huge oil revenues,
um presumably there was some amount of
exuberance, but did the government
recognize and realize that um
you know, they're super fragile to the
price of oil and if that collapses, then
they they need some sort of contingency
plan, some rainy day fund. Um
Or you must notice that like, "Oh, this
is half my budget and all of my foreign
currency is coming from oil
um and this is a very volatile
commodity." Nobody noticed that? Yeah,
well, it's interesting. I was reading
this uh
long chronology that it was put together
sort of early Putin, so before they
really shut down all the information. It
was just a chronology of the Cold War,
big fat book and a
just like someone like me to read a book
like that. So I'm going date after date
after date after date. And it's written
by people who are really angry about how
the Cold War turned out. And one of the
takeaways from the compilers of this
thing is
um they kept criticizing
uh they
they showed how much for every year, how
much Russia was making in oil revenues.
It was huge. But in their analysis, it
was and they saved none of it. Right?
There was no sense of
uh invested in something. You There's
something called consumption, there's
another thing called investment. Um
going around and buying a bunch of I
think western grain is consumption. Uh
there's none of this being put in
anything that's going to yield anything.
And so that was a big criticism of the
authors of this book. Is that what the
question you're asking is no, they just
milked it while they were there. Hm.
Uh final question. This is not so much a
question as an observation. Um
I don't know if you have a reaction to
this. Oh.
>> Um
if you just look at Russia's history
uh
through the 20th century
tsarism to communism to collectivization
to 10% of your more than 10% of your
population dying from World War II, um
then back to Stalin and then more
communism and then the uh economy
collapses again and then Putin and then
especially if you look at the satellite
states, well, they they had all of this
happen to them and worse and now they're
getting invaded. Um
whereas you have other countries like,
you know, Japan and Germany also had
tragic histories, but then they
recovered. The tragedy of Russia
>> lucky you're not Russian.
>> Yeah, exactly. Yeah, I know, it is
tragic. It is tragic and uh
it it started as a difficult address in
um
pre-industrial revolution that required
certain things to survive and they were
more ruthless than their neighbors.
That's how they did survive. I mean,
they just
I in a previous lecture, I discussed how
they wiped out entire princely states
and khanates and things, just wipe them
out. And then you're using their elites
cuz it's a rough neighborhood. And the
problem is if you aren't on the winning
side, you're going to be on the losing
side, right? But in since the Industrial
Revolution
where you can do compounded economic
growth that comes from commerce and
trade and industry and things. So,
that's the real way to get powerful cuz
you get
uh power becomes a function of your
wealth.
Uh that involves having legal systems,
institutions,
stability,
and
uh Russia has found it very difficult
getting with that program. And it it has
to do with I think this very difficult
historical legacy.
Uh who rises to power and also all the
missing things. They
They weren't They They didn't have the
Renaissance. They didn't have the
Reformation, these fundamental movements
that were uh very influential in the
West.
And so, there's a lot of negative space
of things that didn't happen. There's
all the awful stuff that you saw that
did happen. But then they're missing
things.
So, it's a very difficult. And then
people like Putin can set the clock way
back because he's killed so many
Ukrainians.
Uh what he's done will take uh
generation minimum
to
uh get to anywhere where people are
going to be thinking about uh I mean
people will talk about reparations from
Russia for quite a while. And they're
poor. They're not going to want to do
that. Um
I should have thought end of on a more
optimistic note. But
Well, history's ended, okay?
>> [laughter]
>> Well, uh you you've you've outlined the
ways in which countries can chart a
better course for themselves. And that
that's where the optimism can come from.
>> Well, actually, I've told a story about
the last Cold War that stayed cold in
the industrialized world, which was a
good thing cuz it would have been
nuclear. It was tragic in many other
parts of the world, but at least it
stayed cold in the industrialized part.
And there was a strategy that a very
thoughtful generation of people, not
just in the United States, but all over
uh the West that put it together to
allow for um uh a non-nuclear landing
for the Soviet Union when it fell apart.
And I've laid out uh some of the From
this you can derive some of the
strategies that worked for ending it
that way. And these are the kind of
strategies that we're going to have to
use in order to navigate the second Cold
War. And so, the other piece about the
Cold War is okay, the Soviet Union's
living They're living miserable lives of
their own making. But Americans are
actually having a good time. They paid
taxes. They had to pay for all the
nuclear weapons. But as I recall, people
are running around in a Disneyland.
They're doing their European trips.
They're buying houses. And so, actually,
Americans, people in Western Europe were
actually living fulfilling lives while
they're waiting out for others to get
with the program. And that would be the
If we're going to make it through this
second one, uh we're going to need to
start cooperating with our allies,
uh building institutions, improving
laws. Don't just burn down the house. Uh
and we will get through this one, too.
And we will live a fulfilling lives
while we're waiting out Putin to come up
with something different or Xi Jinping
for coming up with something different.
But
um if we blow through our good hand of
cards, which involves having So, you
interview all kinds of people at the
cutting edge of technology. If we get
rid of all of our university funding,
so we aren't going to have the
intellectual capital on which those
businesses are based. If we're going to
dump all our allies for unknown reasons
and just alienate them so they organize
without us. If we're going to
uh just throw away entire institutions
without thinking very carefully about
what we're doing,
uh it's called we become a cooperative
adversary. And we will be the bozo
putting a plastic bag on our own head.
And I look at the rhymes here. The
Soviets had this ancient leadership who
just couldn't get their act together and
they're living off of debt instead of
thinking creatively. Oh, the rhymes are
awful. But we don't have to do it that
way. So, it is more optimistic. But we
need to get our house in order. And
that's why I'm doing these lectures.
They're lectures in strategy to give you
tools on how to come to your own
decisions. That's your business, not
mine. Okay, that is an excellent note to
close on. Sarah, I want to thank you so
much for doing this lecture series with
us. It has been a true education across
these six from everything from
individual wars to the strategic and
tactical decisions which explain them to
the broader lessons for today's world. I
do interview lots of different kinds of
people, but
from a sort of viewer minute average
adjusted basis, I host the CR Pain
podcast. If you just sort by popular,
Sarah Pain comes up a lot.
>> Well, you've got it backwards. I was an
unknown academic. And then you cold
called me about doing an interview. And
I said, "Sure." And Dwarkesh, as a
result of all this, I'm getting emails
from all over the place. So, let's talk
about who's grateful to whom. Anyway,
I'm devoted to your generation. And uh
And anyway, thank you for having me.
Thank you for coming and being such a
warm audience. Really appreciate it.
>> [snorts]
>> Hey everybody. I hope you enjoyed that
episode. If you did, the most helpful
thing you can do is just share it with
other people who you think might enjoy
it. It's also helpful if you leave a
rating or a comment on whatever platform
you're listening on.
If you're interested in sponsoring the
podcast, you can reach out at
dwarkesh.com/advertise.
Otherwise, I'll see you on the next one.